WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now we
travel to Botswana in Southern
Africa to meet a tribe who are
fighting their government
to retain the right to live
on their ancestral lands.
They were forced off in
part because their lands
are rich with diamonds.
Special correspondent Martin
Seemungal has our story.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Their clothes
are modern, but their tools
of the hunt are thousands
of years old.
The San bushmen still use the
spear and the bow and arrow.
Botswana's enormous Central
Kalahari Game Reserve is their
home, and one of the last
places on the planet where
you can find bushmen who still
hunt and gather to survive.
The San have been tracking
like this for generations.
Technically, it's illegal,
because the government
has banned hunting inside
the Central Kalahari
Game Reserve, but some
of them do it anyway.
They say it's very
difficult to stop because
it defines who they are.
Tolme Etata's first memories
are of hunting this land.
"If we stop hunting, our culture
would be affected," he says.
"Hunting and gathering
is part of us."
Though it is part of them,
it is not part of the plan
for the Central Kalahari Game
Reserve, as Botswana's
government sees it.
The San bushmen's way of life
and culture are under threat.
Their struggle to remain here,
in a place originally set
aside for them in the 1960s,
goes back to a major discovery
in the 1980s: diamonds.
By the mid-1990s, the hunt for
precious stones in vast open pit
mines like this meant eviction
from the reserve for
the hunter-gatherers.
Mohulude Moete says it was done
by soldiers and military police.
He says: "We were given
instructions: If you
don't get into the
truck, we will shoot you.
Some of our water containers
were emptied into the ground.
We had no options, so we had to
go along with them or be shot."
These women were young
when the authorities came
for them, but say the
memories are unforgettable.
MUDIKOLELO LEMTODI,
Removed Person: All the
houses were destroyed.
Houses that they used
their energies to
built were destroyed.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL:
Wells were sealed up.
In spite of that, small
numbers refused to leave.
But there were more evictions,
another big one in 2002.
The government denied any
connection between the evictions
and diamonds in the Central
Kalahari Game Reserve.
It said the bushmen were
being moved out to protect
the wildlife in the reserve.
Botswana's president at
the time was Festus Mogae.
QUESTION: Will you let the
bushmen go home, Mr. Mogae?
FESTUS MOGAE, President of
Botswana: Where is home?
Home is in Botswana.
(CROSSTALK)
QUESTION: In the CKGR.
Will you let them go home?
FESTUS MOGAE: No, no.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The semi-arid
Kalahari Desert is a harsh
place, but it's livable, if you
know where to gather,
along with the hunt.
Whether its roots buried deep
in the sandy soil or wild
melons worth a day's water, all
of their sparse
world is put to work.
Traditional huts comes
from the desert brush.
Onjustice Xothelo says two
days' work will last a decade.
The roof is a type
of grassy thatch.
ONJUSTICE XOTHELO, San Bushman:
The thatching grass on top
won't allow even water to get
in.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: But the
government wanted fewer bushmen
staying in, and the evictions
from this land continued
for nearly 10 years.
Bushmen were relocated
to new settlements.
This one is called New
Xade, named for the village
they were forced to leave.
New Xade is just 50 miles from
the Kalahari, but it might
as well be 5,000 miles away.
Officially, nobody
is allowed to return.
Over the years, some have
tried to recreate life in the
villages, but they say it's just
not the same.
You can find those traditional
huts among the small
government-built houses.
"Building the structures here
is a reminder to us that we
had these huts in Kalahari,"
he says.
"But our ancestors aren't here.
We build them to
remind us what we had."
New Xade has good roads, a
modern clinic and a school.
But beyond government-related
jobs, there is little else.
MAN: I'm looking
for a job, a job.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Right.
There's nothing to do here?
MAN: Yes, we have nothing
to do, so, dying for
hunger, looking for job.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: There is a
small mountain of beer cans
outside the one building that
does do big business:
the local bar.
Alcohol abuse is rampant,
leading some to criticize the
government for creating these
relocated towns.
Survival International, an
agency that works to protect
indigenous people, has been the
most vocal.
A spokesperson with survival
says, it is clear that it
is not a viable way of life.
It is not based on choice.
It deprives people of
their meaning, their
sense of well-being.
Survival helped the
bushmen in Botswana's
courts, a proposition
that ended up winning
in 2006.
The high court ruled the bushmen
had been removed unfairly
and should be allowed to
return.
But the government decided
it would read the court
ruling very selectively.
Only bushmen who'd brought the
suit would be allowed to return.
Mosetayani Matsipane was there
for the court case and heard
the judges' ruling, and could
return.
Ten years later, he is
the leader of Motlomelo,
one of a handful of
small bushmen settlements
in the reserve.
The government says
it is working with the
villages to restore some
basic services, like
access to water.
It also wants to focus
on community-based
tourism projects.
Matsipane is happy to be out
of New Xade, but he doesn't
think the government's attitude
has changed.
He believes they still want
him out of the reserve.
"I continually get
pressure," he says.
"The government has been doing
the same thing as before.
But I would rather
they take my dead body.
I won't go back."
His wife, Hakanyaziwe, says
this is where she belongs.
"What's important to me
is the fruit of the land
in Kalahari," she says.
"In the resettlement camps,
everything is about money.
If you don't have money, people
end up stealing to survive."
Professor Maitseo Bolaane
is the director of the San
Research Center, a small office
at the University of
Botswana in Gaborone.
She believes the San people
are a resource that can be used
for the good of the Kalahari
reserve.
MAITSEO BOLAANE,
Director, San Research
Center: They have ideas.
They can contribute their
knowledge system in the
utilization of the resources.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Inside the
CKGR, those small communities
hold on, numbers dwindling every
year, living in the hope that
others will be able to return.
For now, it is only them,
dancing in the desert
under the Kalahari stars.
For the "NewsHour,"
I'm Martin Seemungal in
the Central Kalahari.